.\" nft-tui.1 — see also nft(8), nftables(8)
.TH NFT-TUI 1 "May 2026" "nft-tui" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
nft-tui \- terminal UI for inspecting and managing nftables rulesets

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nft-tui
.RI [ OPTIONS ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nft-tui
is an interactive terminal UI for the Linux nftables firewall.
It presents the live ruleset as a navigable tree (family → table →
chain → rule), with per-rule packet/byte counters refreshed live,
search and filter across the whole ruleset, an htop-style live
monitor with per-rule sparklines, and (with
.BR \-\-write )
a staged-edits workflow: typed edits accumulate locally, dry-run via
.BR "nft \-c" ,
commit atomically via
.BR "nft \-f" ,
and every commit is archived to an audit log.
Snapshot and restore are guarded by a 60-second dead-man's switch:
if the operator doesn't confirm within the window, the previous
ruleset is automatically rolled back.

.B nft-tui
talks to the kernel directly over netlink via the
.UR https://github.com/google/nftables
.B google/nftables
.UE
library for the read path, and shells out to
.B nft
for writes so the operator gets nft's battle-tested validator on
every dry-run and a paste-ready audit file after every commit.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-config\fR \fIpath\fR
Read defaults from
.IR path .
When omitted,
.B nft-tui
looks for
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/nft-tui/config.toml
(or
.BR ~/.config/nft-tui/config.toml )
and reads it silently if present. With
.BR \-config ,
a missing file is a fatal error \(em the operator asked for that
file specifically. See
.B FILES
for the format.

.TP
.B \-dump
Fetch the ruleset, print a structured summary to stdout, and exit.
Useful in scripts or smoke tests where the TUI isn't desired.

.TP
\fB\-refresh\fR \fIduration\fR
Live-counter refresh interval (e.g.\&
.BR 500ms ,
.BR 5s ).
Default
.BR 2s .
Passing
.B 0
disables the polling loop; with
.B \-monitor
on, the UI still refreshes immediately on every kernel mutation.

.TP
.B \-write
Enable edit/commit affordances (\fBa\fR / \fBe\fR / \fBd\fR / \fBo\fR /
\fBO\fR keys, the editor page,
.B :w
/
.B :r
commands, the F2 commit modal). Default is read-only.

.TP
\fB\-audit-dir\fR \fIpath\fR
Directory where committed nft scripts are archived. Default is
.B $XDG_STATE_HOME/nft-tui
(falls back to
.BR ~/.local/state/nft-tui ).
A rolling
.B audit.log
is kept alongside the per-commit files.

.TP
.B \-monitor
Subscribe to kernel netlink events (\fBNFT_MSG_NEW*\fR / \fBNFT_MSG_DEL*\fR)
so the UI refreshes immediately when another process changes the
ruleset. Default
.BR on .

.TP
\fB\-theme\fR \fIname\fR
Colour theme:
.BR default ,
.BR high-contrast ,
or
.BR mono .
Default
.BR default .

.TP
\fB\-pprof\fR \fIaddr\fR
If non-empty, expose Go's
.B net/http/pprof
endpoints on
.IR addr .
Dev-only — the endpoint leaks goroutine stacks, allocation
profiles, and other runtime internals; bind to
.B 127.0.0.1
in any environment except a private workstation. Connect with
.RS 4
.EX
go tool pprof http://127.0.0.1:6060/debug/pprof/heap
go tool pprof http://127.0.0.1:6060/debug/pprof/goroutine
.EE
.RE
Empty (the default) leaves pprof disabled.

.TP
\fB\-log-file\fR \fIpath\fR
Append structured diagnostic logs to
.IR path .
Records internal events — refresh ticks, monitor signals, commit /
restore outcomes, dead-man's switch transitions — for "why isn't
this working?" support. Distinct from the audit log under
.B \-audit-dir
which captures the nft script of every commit. Empty (the default)
disables logging entirely; nft-tui never writes to stderr while the
TUI is on screen.

.SH KEYS
.SS Navigation
.TP
\fBj\fR / \fBk\fR / \fB↓\fR / \fB↑\fR
Move down / up.
.TP
\fBh\fR / \fBl\fR / \fB←\fR / \fB→\fR
Collapse / expand tree node, or switch pane.
.TP
\fBTab\fR
Cycle pane focus.
.TP
\fBg\fR / \fBG\fR
Top / bottom.

.SS Filter and search
.TP
.B /
Filter the current rule list incrementally.
.TP
.B :
Global search across the whole ruleset, OR command line:
.B :w
.I path
snapshots the live ruleset to
.IR path ;
.B :r
.I path
restores from a snapshot (with a 60-second dead-man's switch).

Inside the
.B :
modal,
.B Up
/
.B Down
recall the previous and next history entries (capped at 100 per
session, ring-buffered, blank-input filtered). For
.B :w
and
.B :r
commands,
.B Tab
completes the argument as a filesystem path —
.RB ~/
expands to
.BR $HOME ,
multiple matches advance to the longest common prefix, and a unique
directory match gains a trailing slash so the next
.B Tab
can descend into it.

.SS Yank and reload
.TP
.B y
Yank the selected rule's nft syntax to the clipboard via OSC 52
(works over SSH).
.TP
.B R
Full reload — useful when the status bar shows kernel drift the
auto-rebuild couldn't recover from.
.TP
.B m
Open the live monitor (top-N rules by pps / bps / Δpkts).
.TP
.B c
Cycle the rule-list column preset
.RB ( default
\(rA
.B minimal
\(rA
.B debug
\(rA
.B wide ).

.SS Sort
.TP
.B s
Cycle the rule-list sort: natural (kernel-evaluation order, the
default) \(rA by packets \(rA by bytes \(rA natural. The title bar
shows the current sort when it's not natural, so an operator can't
accidentally mistake a packet-sorted view for the firewall's
evaluation order.
.TP
.B S
Reverse the current sort direction.

.SS Edit (requires \-write)
.TP
.B a
Add a rule to the current chain (append).
.TP
\fBo\fR / \fBO\fR
Insert after / before the selected rule.
.TP
.B e
Edit (replace) the selected rule.
.TP
.B d
Stage a delete of the selected rule.
.TP
.B D
Open the staged-changes / diff page.

.SS Diff page
.TP
.B F3
Dry-run via
.BR "nft \-c \-f" .
.TP
.B F2
Commit via
.BR "nft \-f"
(requires a passing dry-run).
.TP
\fBu\fR / \fBU\fR
Unstage last / unstage all.

.SS Editor page
.TP
.B F5
Stage the rule.
.TP
.B F6
Stage and open the diff page.
.TP
.B F8
Toggle between form and raw nft views.

.SS Modes
.TP
.B q
Quit.
.TP
.B ?
Help overlay (toggle).

.SH FILES
.TP
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/nft-tui/config.toml
Per-host defaults. Keys mirror the CLI flags; missing keys fall back
to the built-in defaults; CLI flags always override.
.RS 4
.EX
refresh   = "2s"
write     = false
monitor   = true
theme     = "default"
columns   = "default"
audit_dir = "/var/lib/nft-tui"
.EE
.RE
Falls back to
.B ~/.config/nft-tui/config.toml
when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset. An example config ships at
.B /usr/share/doc/nft-tui/config.toml
(also in
.B examples/
in the source tree).

.TP
.B $XDG_STATE_HOME/nft-tui/audit.log
Append-only audit log. One header per operation:
timestamp, UID, username, action (commit / restore / rollback),
op count, archived filename.
.TP
.B $XDG_STATE_HOME/nft-tui/audit-YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS.NNN.nft
Per-commit archive: the exact nft script applied. Pastes cleanly
into Ansible or a config-management repo.
.TP
.B $XDG_STATE_HOME/nft-tui/rollback-YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS.NNN.nft
Auto-captured rollback snapshot taken immediately before a
.B :r
restore is applied. Used by the dead-man's switch.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B XDG_STATE_HOME
If set, overrides the audit dir base (default
.BR ~/.local/state ).
.TP
.B HOME
Used to expand
.B ~/
in paths passed to
.B :w
and
.BR :r .

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Normal exit (q / Ctrl-C).
.TP
.B 1
Could not open the netlink connection, or
.B \-dump
encountered a fatal error.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid argument (e.g. unknown
.BR \-theme ).

.SH EXAMPLES
Read-only inspection of the live ruleset:
.RS 4
.EX
$ sudo nft-tui
.EE
.RE

Edit and commit with a 250 ms counter refresh:
.RS 4
.EX
$ sudo nft-tui \-write \-refresh 250ms
.EE
.RE

Snapshot the current ruleset, then restore on demand from inside
the TUI:
.RS 4
.EX
:w ~/edge-router-baseline.nft
:r ~/edge-router-baseline.nft
.EE
.RE

Dump the parsed ruleset (no TUI, ideal for piping to grep / diff):
.RS 4
.EX
$ sudo nft-tui \-dump | grep "dport 22"
.EE
.RE

Development without privileges (uses an unshared net+user namespace):
.RS 4
.EX
$ unshare \-rn ./nft-tui
.EE
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nft (8),
.BR nftables (8),
.BR libnftables (3)

.SH AUTHORS
.B nft-tui
is developed in the open at
.UR https://github.com/dobrevit/nft-tui
.UE .
Bug reports and contributions are welcome; see
.B CONTRIBUTING.md
in the source tree. Report security issues privately to
.MT devops@dobrev.it
.ME .

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Dobrev IT Ltd. and the nft-tui contributors.
Distributed under the MIT License; see the
.B LICENSE
file in the source distribution for the full text.
